
INTRODUCTION

We have lots of information

However a bunch of unorganized documents is not very useful
	unstructured knowledge

We need something:
	- structured records
	- searchable

Database organized collection of data
The chief objective of the development of a database is to organize data in a set of structured records to enable easy retrieval of information

protein sequences known at that time – all 65 of them – and published them in a book called the Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure 

MODELS A DOMAIN

Each record, also called an entry:
	- belongs to a type/kind
	- should contain a number of fields that hold the actual data items, for example, fields for names, phone numbers, addresses, dates. 

It tries to organize the knowledge in an specific area:
	- imdb: movies
	- worldcat: books

Use the movie example

Entity: A model for a kind of entities in that domain

Which entities in the imdb?
	movie
	actor or person with a role

Entity/table, 
	it is common to store each entity in a table
	A table could model an entity

Record=instance=object/row

attributes=properties=fields/columns

Which attributes for a movie?

Which attributes for a sequence?
	sequence:
		quality?
	annotation:
		who published it, where and when?
		Function: molecular, biological
		Structure: exons, introns, CDS...

ID

We have to relate the entities

Unique ID
	- example: DNI or telephone number
	- unique
	- all record should have one
	- best practices
		uniform format
		recognizable
		No odd symbols, only alphanumeric
		No - / or _

SEQUENCE DATABASES

repository of all public sequences
	EMBL, Genbank, Japan
	There are three major public sequence databases that store raw nucleic acid sequence data produced and submitted by researchers worldwide: GenBank, the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) database and the DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ), which are all freely available on the Internet. Most of the data in the databases are contributed directly by authors with a minimal level of annotation.

Growth
	NGS


Main characteristics, level of:
- Sequence quality:
		fragments, like gene fragments
		raw sequences
- annotation
	- record characteristics
	- relationships with other databases
	- manual or atuomated
- redundancy
	All sequences are many sequences
	repeated sequences. HIV example

- curation:
	- manual or automated
		example swissprot vs Genbank nr

Databases are divided in sections:
	example: NCBI nr and refseq


GENBANK

nr/ns:
	- everything public
	- Not NGS

RefSeq:
	- curated
	- one sequence per transcript or genome
		- not all sequences are there
	- high quality annotation
	- not available for all species
 	- significant amount of redundancy within the major sequence databases, with a good number of sequences being represented more than once. This is often problematic for the end user, who may find themselves confused as to which sequence to use after performing a search that returns numerous results. To address this issue, NCBI developed RefSeq, the goal of which is to provide a single reference sequence for each molecule of the central dogma – DNA, RNA, and protein.
	- RefSeq entries undergo ongoing curation, assuring that the RefSeq entry represents the most up-to-date state of knowledge regarding a particular DNA, mRNA, or protein sequence.  

SRA:
	- NGS raw sequences

TrEMBL
Automatic translations and annotation of every CDS

SWISSPROT
Manualy curated protein functions
Ultimate source of most annotations

for the three-dimensional structures of biological macromolecules, there is only one centralized database, the PDB. This database archives atomic coor- dinates of macromolecules (both proteins and nucleic acids) determined by x-ray crystallography and NMR. 

A recent effort to combine SWISS-PROT, TrEMBL, and PIR led to the creation of the UniProt database, 

SPECIES CENTERED DATABASES
extra information:
	mutants
	collections of materials
	genetic maps

PUBMED

literature citations

primary life sciences
	biochemistry, cellular biology, medicine

record
	title
	abstract
	authors

PMC
	complete text

SEQUENCE FILE FORMATS
In its simplest form, a sequence record can be represented as a string of nucleotides with some basic tag or identifier. The most widely used of these simple formats is FASTA 


They are text files

They are standard

plain sequence format

fasta format

fastq format
	adds quality

Genbank format
	has rich annotation

GFF: format to store the annotation

ONTOLOGY

We have looked for mutations in cancer tissue or for GWAS in a disease
How do we look for which metabolic pathways are affected?

We need to label each gene in the database
And the label should be exactly the same for every pathway

natural language, which is often ambiguous and imprecise. Researchers working on different organisms tend to apply different terms to the same type of genes or proteins. 

A way of structuring knowledge

Define entities of a domain

Ontology: controlled vocabulary

usefulness:
	- Clarify the terms
	- avoid synonyms problems
	- facilitate automatic analyses,
		dababase searches
		e.g. statistical analysis kind of proccess found in overexpressed genes in cancer 
	- label each entity (e.g. gene in a standarized way)

Many are hierarchical
the hierarchy specifies more precisely the functional role 

Main biological ontologies:
	Gene ontology: molecular function, biological process, cellular component
	KEGG: enzymes and pathways
	Sequence ontology: genome annotation

Database limitations

there are many errors in sequence databases. There are also high levels of redundancy in the primary sequence databases. Annotations of genes can also occasionally be false or incomplete 

ALL ABSTRACTIONS LEAK

All abstractions leak ( no se puede poner todo sobre la entidad, al escoger lo mas relevante se pierde algo siempre)
Define what is to be a man or woman
You pay a price in order to simplify a domain, you loose details. You have to decide how much

